# CA-SWITRS-PCF-Analysis-Tool
Project Overview  

	The California Highway Patrol maintains a database containing various details from a collision scene. The Statewide Integrated Traffic Records System (SWITRS) contains 3 tables of information about the collision, victims, and parties involved. While the CHP does provide a yearly summary of the data as a “Quick Crash Facts'' pdf, a lot of information is yet to be extracted from the raw data in the SWITRS. In this project, my focus will be to create a model that predicts the primary collision factor (PCF) category on a given day for a particular city in California. This model will help identify the relationships between collision factors and driving conditions. Once the model is made, it will be deployed to create a tool that can be used to alert users of key factors to consider when traveling on a given day. This tool can also be used by government agencies such as CalTrans or CHP to prepare major highways for potential threats to driver safety. Finally, this tool can help schedule the personnel needed to adequately respond to roadside emergencies on any given day of the year.   
 
Purpose  

As of 2020, California has over 30 million registered vehicles (Mesarani Law, 2023). In 2021, there were over 27 million licensed drivers, the most in any state (Carlier, 2023). California’s large number of licensed drivers has also made it the state with the most car accidents, second only to Texas (Wisevoter, 2023). While many statistics can be found on the details about collisions in California such as Mesriani Law Group’s website or the CHP SWITRS annual report, this project focuses on how machine learning can be used to learn more about the factors involved in a crash. The model created in this project will predict the leading cause of accidents on a given day of the year based on the city. A user interface will allow individuals to gain insights into collision trends through statistical interpretation and visualizations. By predicting this information, government agencies can be better prepared to prevent collisions, adequately respond to accidents, plan and design road infrastructure, and educate drivers.   

Project Focus  

In this project, I aim to focus on how various factors contribute to different types of collisions across cities in California and how these insights can be used to ultimately reduce the number of collisions in the future. While there is a large amount of data and information contained in this database, strategically selecting features to consider in our machine learning algorithm will be a vital part of this project. Given the timeline of this project, only some portions of data from the tables in the SWITRS database will be considered. As a result, the predictions of the model will contain only relevant information to the factors of a collision as well as highlight the most important features but a comprehensive analysis of the entire dataset will not be achieved. However, we will use most of the data for descriptive and exploratory analysis. A user interface will provide a predicted PCF category as well as key insights into the details of that prediction based on given user parameters. This could help determine what factors should be considered when planning for new roadways or choosing educational campaigns for new drivers to name a few examples of use cases. By providing insights on collision patterns throughout the year, drivers and government agencies can prepare for safer travel.   

Expected Outcomes  

After the model is successfully deployed, the tool will allow users to view the predicted PCF category for a given day in a city. The users will also be able to view the most important factors that contributed to the model prediction. As a result, the user can make strategic decisions for their intended use of the tool based on the prediction or factors. For example, if on December 12 in Truckee, the model suggested that wet road conditions were the leading cause of collisions, the city might prepare to deploy signage that encourages drivers to check wear on their tires. Hopefully, ultimately reducing the number of collisions in the future.
